[Music]
everyone I have ever met
wants to know the secret of happiness I
have yet to find an exception this seems
like to all of us a timeless question
but in fact this question is brand new
because all of your ancestors knew what
the secret of happiness was for most of
human history life was in the words of
Thomas Hobbes solitary poor brutish
nasty and short that's right most of
your ancestors had about 70% of their
children died before they reached
adulthood food was scarce health was
poor a day of work was long and when you
got up in the morning your entire to-do
list was trying not to die today
basically if you survived till the
evening it was a big success and
everybody knew what the secret of
happiness was happiness is a mythical
state that a human being could attain if
only he or she had everything they
wanted and that of course doesn't happen
to human beings on earth maybe in heaven
but not to anyone here happiness is what
we get if only we could get what we
wanted well fast forward to hundred
thousand years and suddenly that
hypothesis is put to a test because we
have three revolutions first we have an
agricultural revolution then we have an
industrial revolution where we learn to
make machines that work and then
recently a digital revolution where we
learn to make machines that process
information and as a result of these
three revolutions which have happened in
just the last 10,000 years suddenly for
the first time in human history large
populations of human beings have
everything they want in all the places
where the lights are on at night the
people have what they want at least they
have what they could reasonably want and
guess what they're not always happy
indeed if
you just look at the people who have far
more than they could possibly want
they're not always happy either these
five men have a combined net worth of
500 billion dollars this is the gross
national product of India I have met all
five of these men they are always
interesting they are always kind they
are not always happy now why if
happiness is what happens when we get
what we want they should not only be
happy they should be billions of times
happier than me and they're not would
you suggest that happiness isn't about
getting what we want and the question is
why do we think it is one of the answers
is that every one of us is a citizen of
a social unit we are members of families
members of communities universities
organizations and we are surrounded by
other people who tell us where happiness
is to be found right we've all got moms
and dads aunts and uncles we meet
bartenders and taxi drivers there are
motivational speakers and talk-show
hosts and every one of them has a theory
about what you have to do if you want to
be happy in life and we are the
recipients of all that cultural wisdom
the problem with cultural wisdom is it
turns out not to always be very wise how
do I know that what gives me the right
to stand here and say that your mom and
dad might actually be wrong well I'm a
scientist
in the last 30 years psychologists and
economists have gotten together to get
into the happiness business that's right
they found ways to measure happiness and
if you can measure something you can do
science on it using all the basic tools
that scientists use to figure out what
makes butterflies migrate or what causes
cells to divide economists and
psychologists have been figuring out
what causes human happiness and I want
to share with you just a little bit of
what they found by first introducing you
to my mom now my mom gave me a lot of
advice about happiness so much that I
would need an hour in 18 minutes not
just 18 minutes to tell you all the
things she said
I had to do if I wanted to have a happy
life but when I think about it her
advice really came down to three major
things first marriage my mother had no
doubt that I needed to find a nice girl
and get married
second my mother said I needed to make
money now my mother would never have
used the word money but what she would
say is it would be good if you were
comfortable it's good if you're not
worried too much about things by which
she meant money I should do something in
my life to have material well-being
finally my mother said children children
lots of children soon okay now I thought
this was Doris Gilbert's prescription
for happiness and it was but it turns
out it is also the advice that mothers
in every culture on earth give their
children these three things seem to be
universal in our belief about what
brings happiness well do they are
mothers all over the world right or
wrong the answer is yes let me show you
let's start with marriage now I could
ask you I could say please raise your
hand if you think marriage makes people
happy and what I would find in this
audience is most of the hands do not go
up on the other hand if you were here
with your spouses almost all the hands
would go up even if your spouse had to
raise it for you the truth is you are
smarter when your spouse is around
marriage does make people happy how do
we know that well let's look at the
basic fact if you look at people and
different with different marital
statuses you see this pattern of data
over and over all over the world married
people are happier than every other
group of people especially people who
are separated down at the bottom end and
why shouldn't they be they they have
better health they earn more money per
capita they have more sex and enjoy it
more virtually everything you might
think is an ingredient for a happy life
married people have more of it this
difference between the married and the
unmarried is stable across the lifespan
what you're seeing here is the typical
u-shaped curve of
happiness and you can see what many of
you have probably learned which is it's
really good to be young and then life
gets harder but don't worry because it's
really good to be old to young people
and old people are quite happy and all
the people in the middle are less happy
probably because they're mainly taking
care of the people on the two sides of
them what I want you to notice about
these two lines is that at every stage
the married people are happier this is
also a finding that seems to be stable
across time here our data for happiness
of US citizens from the 70s through the
2010 and you can see that some years are
happy years and if you've been following
American politics some years are not
happy years but what you can see is
although happiness does go up and down a
bit the married people are always
happier than the unmarried people in
fact in the worst year married people
are still happier than unmarried people
in the best year now you might ask
yourself particularly if you have a
scientific bent
oh wait a minute that's a correlation
what you're telling me is married people
are happier but that doesn't mean
marriage made them happier fact maybe
happiness makes marriage maybe people
are happier do better on the marriage
market in fact they do that's correct
you had to marry one of the characters
from Winnie the Pooh it's either E or or
piglet it's a bad choice but you know
you're gonna take piglet and not a or
nobody wants to be stuck with somebody
who is morose sad and dour but we also
know that marriage is a cause of
happiness how do we know this well take
a look at data like these these are what
we call longitudinal data where you
follow the same people whether they're
piglets or yours over time and this is
typically what you see as people move
towards their wedding day they're
getting happier and happier and after
their wedding they're really happy we
call this the honeymoon period and then
guess what happiness starts to decline
now if I were to draw this graph out
past six years to 10 years 20 years 30
years does it ever come back to where it
started yes I'm afraid it does it looks
like the happiness benefits of marriage
we're off how long does it take some
studies suggest it's as little as 10
years some as much as 20 let's call it
15 now some of you look disappoint
but wait a minute 15 years of extra
happiness in your life for the sentence
I do so what's the world's Georgia
sentence and you bought yourself 15
extra years of happiness there isn't
much to complain about
I should note before leaving the topic
of marriage that the other thing that
makes people as happy as getting married
is getting divorced when you look at
divorce statistics people get much
happier after a divorce now wait a
minute how can it be that marriage and
divorce which are opposites both make
you happy should I get out go out and
get married than divorced married
divorced married divorce like Hollywood
people do know what these two statistics
tell us what these two statistics tell
us together
[Music]
what these two data points tell us
together and I think everyone would
agree is that it isn't marriage that
makes us happy it's good marriage that
makes us happy that is when people are
in marriages that are at least good
enough not to get divorced they get
happiness out of them one of the best
ways to predict whether marriage will
make somebody happy as their answer to
the question is your spouse your best
friend people who answer yes to that
question get a big boost out of marriage
okay money everybody knows that money
can't buy happiness that is the
stupidest thing you will ever hear
anyone say it is utterly not true it is
false in any study I've ever seen I've
never seen a single study or getting
more money made anybody less happy money
buys happiness if you don't know that go
talk to somebody who is homeless living
in a cardboard box under a bridge and
explain to them that true happiness
comes from something other than money no
it doesn't money makes people happy but
you knew there was a but coming didn't
you
but it isn't a simple relationship
between money and happiness it's what we
call a curvilinear relationship if you
look at this graph and contemplate it
what you see is that the first dollar
you earn is a source of great joy and
every other dollar or euro or mark
afterwards brings you just a little less
happiness moving people out of poverty
into the middle class dramatically
changes their lives moving them from the
middle class to the upper class well it
does increase their happiness but not
that much and moving them into the
stratospherically wealthy does almost
nothing at all now we're on this curve
is the line where basically the
inflection point the point where there's
really not much more benefit to having
more money in u.s. dollars you get 95
percent of all the happiness that money
can buy if you are in seventy five
thousand dollars per year I should note
that eighty percent of Americans don't
earn this amount but this is nowhere
near being rich why does this line curve
some people believe it's a law of nature
money
like pancakes right you eat one and it's
fabulous the second is pretty good the
third is starting to feel like too much
and after that you're feeling sick it's
just a law of nature that enough is
enough
but economists like to say if money
doesn't make you happy you're not
spending it right and in fact that is
true we know that people who have money
do the wrong things with it if what they
want is happiness I'll give you an
example this is a study on how happy a
number about 10,000 Europeans are as
they are going about a number of daily
ordinary activities working commuting
watching TV etc you shouldn't be
surprised by most of these data guess
what most people just hate being at work
they really don't like traveling to it
either watching television is okay
talking with somebody usually a friend
or a family member is a real pleasure
and guess what psychologists find that
people like sex yes they really do seem
to get a lot of pleasure from sex now
here's the data point that I hope will
surprise you how happy are people when
they're doing nothing when they're
resting when they're just looking up
into the sky with their hands behind
their heads they're about as happy as
when they are working or commuting doing
nothing is not a source of pleasure but
if you ask people what would you do if
you won the lottery
they almost give you always give you
some answer that's some version of rest
oh I would quit my job I would stop I
would just get a boat and I would just
sail and I would just rest wrong answer
I I would talk during sex that's a good
answer
[Music]
now finally children children this is
the easy one isn't it in English we say
a child is a bundle of joy in other
words it is a good that is named after
happiness children are the greatest
source of happiness compared to anything
else nothing else is a source of
happiness and yet when you look at the
data you find consistently that people
without children are happier than people
with children and people with children
are the least happy when their children
have the audacity to actually live with
them you see the same thing if you
follow people over time as they
approached the birth of their first
child their happiness is stable and then
once they have their first child their
happiness decreases if I were to extend
this line out
does it come back how long does it take
to come back to where it started
never or in some datasets approximately
when your children move away it may come
back to its baseline or it may not while
you have children if you have children
on average they will make you less happy
not more how unhappy do children make
you is it a little is it a lot here are
some data collected on about a thousand
American women who are also reporting on
their happiness as they go about a
number of daily normal activities these
are collected by someone who won the
Nobel Prize in Economics recently and
you're gonna see how happy these women
are as they do ordinary things like
talking with friends which is great
eating which everybody enjoys but
grocery shopping and doing housework
they're very low on anybody's list of
happiness making activities how happy
are women when they are with their
children it's like scrubbing the toilet
it's not even as good as shopping for
the things you need to scrub the toilet
nope I know it's amusing and yet most of
you don't believe it you think it's
funny but there's got to be something
wrong because if I asked any of you how
many of you are now ready to give away
your children nobody would raise their
hand
inside you're thinking this just doesn't
ring true of me and one reason is it
probably isn't true of you don't make
the mistake of thinking because it's not
true for you it is not true for the
majority of the world let me show you
for example how what kinds of things
determine whether Parenthood will or
won't make you happy now if we lived in
a world in which children had no impact
on your happiness these are the kinds of
data we would see we would see that
about half the people are getting
happiness out of their children and half
are getting unhappiness out of their
children and those two things cancel out
and children have no net impact on
average my mother said we live in this
world we live in a world where virtually
everybody gets joy some people great joy
from their children and of course there
are a few crazy people out there who
don't but this is the world we actually
live in a world in which this
distribution is slightly shifted to the
left in other words on average children
are having a small but negative effect
on the happiness of their parents but
notice in this curve there are plenty of
people like most of you who are getting
pleasure from their children who are
these lucky Souls well we know a lot of
things about whether happiness will or
won't make whether children will or
won't make people happy for example we
know it varies very much by nationality
in about two-thirds of the nations that
have been surveyed by the Gallup
Organization children create a negative
effect on their parents happiness but
about 1/3 they create a positive effect
these are the big winners and losers
from last year's survey Montenegro and
Macedonia I have no idea why they are so
far out on the extremes but I can tell
you the United States and Switzerland
are very close to 0 just slightly on the
negative side we also see that your
marital status makes a big difference
look at this
married people again are getting a small
negative effect of children but the big
negative effects are accruing to people
who are single or divorced we also know
that the younger you are the more likely
it is your children are making you um
happy rather than happy and of course
much to everybody's surprise women are
made much less happy by children than
men are now what do all these data tell
you they tell you what probably should
have known which is children are really
hard work we give up blood sweat tears
hair or money all sorts of things to
raise them if you have those things to
give if you have resources your children
you'd be a great source of pleasure but
if you are like most people in the world
not capable of assigning all these
resources to child rearing children are
really really hard work and hard work
doesn't make people happy so what is my
mom how does she batting here how was
her score well on marriage she was right
but she should have mentioned I wouldn't
have had more than one if she had just
told me it has to be a good one
I didn't know I thought marriage okay
money well she was right but she also
should have mentioned that a little bit
of money buys a lot of happiness and a
lot more money only buys a little bit
and children yes for some people but not
for most the word for happiness is
related to the word for luck in almost
all human languages why is that the
historian Darren McMahon put it very
well for cultures regularly subject to
appeals and twists of fate from the
descent of plague to the appearance of a
marauding army to the onset of famine or
the wrath of one's betters it was
difficult to imagine happiness as
something that could endure still less
as something that one could control
happiness rather was in the hands of the
gods meted out by fortune or forged in
the crucible of fate happiness was luck
a good luck that occurred for almost
nobody and now we are suddenly in a new
age for the first time in human history
we have our happiness in our hands it is
in our control how should we look for it
where should we go
we do to find it well for centuries
millennia we've been relying on the
wisdom of our cultures look I love my
mother but she's not the person I go to
to find out anything about nuclear
fission or nano scale batteries okay
for those things these facts about the
world I turn to science I'd like to
suggest to you that what makes human
beings happy is a fact about human
beings that science can discover and it
is a place we can now reliably turn for
information about happiness it's my
belief that the more we truly understand
about this central phenomenon in our
lives the more likely it is that we can
get greater happiness for ourselves for
those we love and for all the people of
this planet thank you so much for your
kind attention
[Music]
you